This video discusses Buddhism, the history
of ancient Buddhism, modernity, and atheist
attitudes toward the history of religion,
but I should say that I'm making this video
(from my own perspective) to discuss a flaw
I discovered in my own thinking as I grew
up —and it's a flaw that seemed to be my
own natural attitude toward religion, history
and mythology, as a consequence of the culture
I was raised in.
The video also draws together several different
questions about the history of Buddhism that
came up in my first few videos on Youtube.
The concept of Apotheosis often seems like
the punchline to a bad joke.
Although America remains a very religious
country, nobody seems to be offended by the
rather sacrilegious painting on the ceiling
of the Capitol building, showing George Washington
in transition from man to god.
The word seems uniquely European —and linked
to Pagan Rome— but, in fact, there are examples
from cultures with written records all over
the world.
Western interpreters do apply the idea to
the religions of Asia (both thinkingly and
unthinkingly, I'd say).
Guan Gong (the man in the painting here) was
originally a mere mortal, but he was elevated
to his supernatural status many centuries
after he died.
A literary character that was loosely inspired
by him developed more than just a cult following
—it became a major part of Chinese religion.
The historical figure was never a religious
leader, and never presented himself as a god;
even the literary character named after him
is an entirely secular, mortal figure; nevertheless,
this tradition ended up producing a publicly-worshipped
god (one of the most visible and widespread
in East Asia today).
In Western culture, we tend to think of this
as the natural progress of history —partly
just because it reflects the most popular
view of the Christian Bible.
We assume that real, historical people are
elevated to the status of gods after their
deaths, and that myths both conceal and reveal
historical figures by exaggerating their exploits
in this way.
Built into that approach is the unfounded
assumption that the Bible is an imperfect
record of historical events, and that the
authors thought of what they were doing (in
writing the Bible) as recording the history
of real events.
That is extremely questionable, even with
a corpus of texts as heavily researched as
the Christian Bible; and the questions become
harder to deal with when we shift to talking
about ancient Buddhist texts.
The template for Apotheosis runs along these
lines: a normal person becomes famous somehow
(as a king, as a conqueror, or as a religious
leader... on this chart for simplicity, we
say that it's a king we're talking about),
and then the record of their all-too-human
accomplishments becomes the subject of legend.
The legends are embellished and exaggerated;
things that were originally real are made
to represent things that are instead ideal.
The opposite process has a name that we hear
much less often: Euhemerism.
Sometimes, in some cultures, abstract gods
are instead inserted into history; in other
words, myths are written to advance the false
that these gods had been historically-real
people in retrospect.
Examples of Euhemerism are important, I think,
in challenging the habit of mind that looks
within myths to uncover historical persons.
We do have well-documented cases of entirely
abstract gods being made into false historical
figures.
We have examples of gods that began as personifications
of abstract ideals, and then were later made
to seem as if they had been real people in
their origins, embellishing the story by adding
human details.
Although it seems strange now, there were
strong motivations for authors to do this
in the ancient world: if you can connect a
widely-known god to a particular lineage,
dynasty, or location, you can, at least, have
an impact on tourism, and you could even have
an impact on politics.
On the island of Crete they had the idea that
Zeus was one of their own ancient kings: a
mere mortal in his origins, and linked to
the heritage of their own royal families.
You can imagine that this might be very popular
with the kings of Crete themselves, and apparently
it was popular with their followers, also.
The idea itself was offensive to some Greeks
on the mainland, who continued to worship
Zeus as an immortal and abstract god, and
refused to accept him as a particular king
in a particular tomb on a particular island.
Although it is alien to our modern way of
thinking about religion, this example gives
a sense of the cultural power of bringing
the gods down to earth: when he's reduced
to being a mortal man, Zeus may cease to be
"Zeus almighty", but he becomes our Zeus —a
particular Zeus, with a powerful meaning for
a particular people, place, and political
establishment.
Following this pattern, it should be no surprise
that quite a few royal families claimed to
be descendants of Hercules.
The example of Romulus (on the right hand
side of the screen) is fairly well-known:
it clearly shows an abstract god who who had
more and more human features added to his
cult with time, being portrayed (eventually)
as an historical figure with a date of birth
assigned to him, along with a date of death,
and so on.
It would be greatly misleading to look at
any of these myths and assume that the more
human aspects are the original, ancient version
of the story, closer to the historical truth.
The pattern of Euhemerism reminds us that
Apotheosis is just one way of thinking about
the history of religion, and it is a pattern
that we (as modern readers) are imposing onto
mythology, rightly or wrongly.
Which pattern does Herakles follow?
In an earlier video, I compared the myth of
Herakles to the Buddha, and pointed out how
extremely tempting it is to just accept the
"realistic" anecdotes about Herakles as historical
evidence, while basically ignoring whatever
seems supernatural.
It's tempting, but it's really an emotional
decision rather than a rational one.
When you read an anecdote that seems to resonate
with human nature, it's easy to imagine that
this is a fragment of "the real Hercules",
in contrast to other genres of mythology and
fable.
However, the method doesn't make sense with
Hercules any more than it does with Shakespeare's
Hamlet.
The character of Hamlet is very indirectly
inspired by a more ancient legend, and that
legend is supposed to reflect real, historical
events.
However, there is absolutely no way that you
could discover the truth about those events
by looking within Shakespeare's script, accepting
which aspects seemed compelling to you, and
rejecting the aspects that you thought were
spurious.
We can't delete the mythology from Hamlet,
to reveal history hidden underneath.
Sadly, that is the most popular way for Europeans
to read Buddhist literature, selecting what
seems to them to be real (or at least realistic)
and then speculating on the historical implications,
while ignoring evidence to the contrary, and
sometimes ignoring the genre of literature
that their selected evidence comes from.
I would say that the majority of people who
grew up Atheist probably believed something
like this about the biblical Jesus, too.
I grew up assuming that Moses and even storybook
characters like Robin Hood were, ultimately,
indirect echoes of real people and events,
although I don't think that any of the adults
around me had any motivation to teach me to
think this way.
It's an assumption that we bring with us to
our reading of history, and (as I'm asking
in the text on-screen here) we tend to let
ourselves imagine that a skeptical reading
of mythology reveals something other than
a myth, instead of supposing that we might
just be discovering an earlier version of
the myth.
Conversely, one interesting side-effect of
this attitude toward mythology, is that we're
always producing new mythology, through new
interpretations that fasten onto one aspect
or another of the story as "real" and "original",
rejecting the rest of the evidence.
The people engaged in this kind of cultural
production may not have any faith in the religion
involved, and may be entirely aware that they're
producing something new (not discovering something
ancient within the texts).
I do not think that either of the examples
on-screen were men who sincerely believed
in the Christian god, but they both produced
their own versions of "the historical Jesus",
basically by highlighting some aspects of
the Bible story and then removing others.
Both of them were motivated to make some kind
of social change in their own times, and they
were concerned with the future of the religion
(and politics), not with the past.
So, of course, there was never any evidence
to support Jefferson's idea of a secularized
Jesus, with the supernatural aspects cut out
of the story; the whole exercise was creative,
and didn't pretend to be based on evidence.
Likewise, Woody Guthrie's reinvention of Jesus
as an advocate for the poor was a creative
endeavor; it was an attempt to shape and influence
the future of the religion, without any pretense
of recovering something ancient or authentic
from the historical past.
However, even when the authors involved neither
present themselves as religious leaders nor
as scholars digging up the past, the whole
exercise reflects this same pattern of thinking:
we look at the gods as if they're a product
of apotheosis, and we therefore look at myths
as if we can subtract what's superstitious
from them, to reveal something historically
real underneath.
Although I doubt that Woody Guthrie believed
that his version of Jesus was more authentic
than the one commonly worshipped in America,
most religious leaders are not nearly so detached
and flippant about these things: it's really
very common for brand new reconstructions
of religious ideas to be asserted as more
definitive and more ancient than the versions
offered by competing sects —and they're
asserted as such with all due seriousness
and religious zeal.
In the 19th and 20th centuries, the pattern
of Apotheosis was applied to Buddhism constantly
and uncritically, by both religious leaders
and scholars.
To play devil's advocate for a moment, remember
that the ancient texts arrived in the modern
era in a disorganized mess.
Scholars both in Europe and in Asia were often
lacking any sense of which texts came first,
or how competing claims to being the most
ancient form of Buddhism should be weighed.
So, it is understandable that they would treat
the texts that seemed "most human" as being
more ancient than texts that treated the Buddha
as a god; however, it's understandable because
that's exactly what people had already been
doing with Jesus, Romulus, Hercules, and many
other examples.
This pattern was so influential that terms
like "Early Buddhism" have become synonymous
with a non-magical Buddhism —and this version
of Buddhism is arrived at through the same
method used by Thomas Jefferson in his creation
of his own version of the Bible (simply, deleting
from the text anything that was contrary to
his own preference).
You'll notice that because of this prejudice,
my own, earliest videos on Youtube repeatedly
clarify that when I say something is more
ancient, I do not mean it is more rational,
or less magical —I am just talking about
the historical precedence of the texts.
The third point on screen tempts me to offer
a number of anecdotes: many academics today
are now attacking everything related to "the
historical Buddha" in a really incoherent
way (and this is something I've discussed
in an earlier video, also).
Richard Gombrich told me about a very mean-spirited
peer-review he received (and this shows that
even famous scholars like Gombrich do face
rejection sometimes) in which the reviewer
claimed that any discussion of the historical
Buddha whatsoever belonged in the 19th century,
and, therefore, this new research should not
be published.
Whether the people involved in these debates
wear robes or wear suits and ties, we're talking
about the intersection of religion and politics
here.
This pattern was not confined to Europe, but
involved many Asians (monks, scholars, even
political leaders in Asia).
The cultural consequences were intense within
Buddhist Asia, in places as diverse as Sri
Lanka and Taiwan.
It's quite wrong to pretend that the reinvention
of Buddhism, defining the historical Buddha
to come into line with modern interests, was
some kind of European conspiracy.
Some Asian intellectuals wanted to rediscover
the historical Buddha, but more were engaged
in a creative re-invention of the religion
(just like Woody Guthrie or Thomas Jefferson)
and they were aware that they were doing this.
Within Buddhism, also, there were already
pre-modern examples of religious leaders selecting
a particular fragment of text as the original,
definitive teaching of the Buddha, and then
dismissing or denigrating other written sources;
the founding of Nichiren Buddhism in Japan
is an extreme example of this.
However, in some ways, the pattern we're now
discussing here is distinctive to the last
few centuries (it's a response to modernism,
post-colonialism, new availability of texts
and so on, and increasing levels of education,
and many other factors).
It is, I think, really inappropriate to pretend
that the Asian voices in the modernization
of Buddhism were passive recipients of European
influence; the two examples shown in the photographs
on-screen both had their own entrepreneurial
zeal, even if they worked with Europeans,
or sought patronage and support from Europeans.
The successful leaders of reform movements
were not passive observers of social change
in their respective cultures, they were innovators
in making those changes.
And innovate they did.
The discovery of the historical Buddha (or,
his repeated rediscovery) was used to support
almost any modern agenda imaginable.
If Buddhism as it actually existed was insufficiently
feminist, then somehow this would be construed
as a latter addition to the religion, and
the more-ancient "historical Buddha" would
be argued to have supported women's equality.
If Buddhism (as a religion) supported the
caste system in Sri Lanka, or if Buddhism
supported slavery in Thailand, this whole
edifice of what the religion was actually
doing could be ignored, and we could instead
turn our attention to what "the historical
Buddha" supposedly said about these issues.
I've chosen these examples to tug at your
heart-strings a little bit: nobody is interested
in "authenticity" if that authenticity includes
slavery, the subjugation of women, and the
caste system.
Nevertheless, we have to be extremely wary
of the fabrication of a whole pseudo-history
of Buddhism just to suit modern political
concerns.
Many people would respond to these particular
examples by insisting that they're not 100%
wrong, but, of course, some Christians could
claim that Woody Guthrie's version of Jesus
as some kind of Socialist advocate for the
poor isn't 100% wrong, either.
In both cases, what we're really looking at
is the construction of new myths out of old
ones, and it's the method of constructing
the new myth that I would say is really 100%
wrong.
We can't selectively delete evidence from
ancient texts, and then pretend that we're
reading history.
And, as it says on-screen, this type of reinterpretation
was generally done with very little sincere
interest in the historical evidence; instead,
the interpreters have had quite a lot of interest
in the political issues of their own generation.
Conveniently, I've already written a long
essay dealing with the other side of this
story that I don't want to discuss here: a
small number of scholars were sincerely trying
to reconstruct a "proto-canon" for a "proto-religion"
in their researches into Buddhist texts.
If you want to know more about that project,
you can take a look at my essay "Canon and
Reason" (now available in both Chinese and
English).
However, that side of the story only influence
a small number of people (frankly, people
like me) who aspired to do original research
on the texts.
By contrast, the major modernizing movements
in Buddhism influenced millions of people,
with much more ad hoc ideas about what we
should imagine the origins of Buddhism to
be.
So, in the 19th and 20th centuries, both of
these things were happening simultaneously:
1.
A small number of scholars created the (false)
expectation that the most ancient form of
Buddhism was about to be "rediscovered" or
"reconstructed" (in contrast to what was openly
said to be the corrupt and degraded form of
the religion as it could be observed in contemporaneous,
Asian societies).
2.
And, secondly, a much larger number of monks
and laypeople were engaged in projects to
modernize Buddhism —with everything new
asserted to be ancient.
(I mean, by this, the same pattern mentioned
before, whereby the historical Buddha is supposed
to be a feminist, in order to challenge gender
inequality in Buddhism, and so on.)
I wish I could say I was joking when I say
that this pattern could be applied to anything
and everything, but there was really no limit
to its application.
More than one school of psychology came to
be represented as Buddhist, various competing
ideals of democracy were ascribed to the historical
Buddha, along with Socialism, Communism, and
so on.
In the context of Thailand's alternation between
democracy and dictatorship, the influential
Thai monk Buddhadasa published works arguing
that the Buddha's original teaching could
support military dictatorship during one period
of time, and then instead argued that the
Buddha's teaching was linked to democracy
in another.
In many ways, Buddhadasa's significance in
Thailand was in helping the country catch
up with exactly the pattern of modernizing
Buddhism that was already well-established
in Sri Lanka (the pattern of "brand new ancient
Buddhism", I've called it).
In the 20th century, the desire for Buddhism
to be an important part of modern debates
was much stronger than the interest in reconstructing
the historical reality of Buddhism's origins.
This tends to be forgotten in retrospect:
the religion's openly political aspirations
(both modernizing and nationalistic) are looked
back upon as if they were a debating club
to establish historical facts.
This shouldn't be too hard to sympathize with:
all of these countries had tremendous violence
and uncertainty in the 20th century, and went
through technological and social transformations
(along with rather a lot of civil war, revolution
and so on).
In discussing modern Buddhism, we both have
the general and profound problem that we can
never arrive at historical facts by deleting
what is supernatural from mythology, but we
also have the politically-charged context
of the 19th and 20th centuries.
The result was a great deal of ad hoc reinvention
of Buddhism, presented as ancient, and that
has been extremely influential, but never
could be supported as fact.
When I say "extremely influential", I don't
mean that it has influenced only people who
consider themselves Buddhists.
Consider that circa 50 years ago, the vast
majority of people who described themselves
as atheists were influenced by the assumption
that there was an historical Jesus (if not
an historical Moses).
"We" assumed that the Bible contained important
historical facts, despite supernatural elements
and myths (and, as I just said, we tend to
take the further step of ignoring the supernatural
material, to then treat the rest of the myth
as historical evidence).
It is very, very difficult to challenge this
pattern of thinking, even with people who
don't believe in any religion —whether we're
talking about Buddhism or Chrisitianity as
the case may be.
Today, many non-Buddhists feel very strongly
about the notion that the historical Buddha
never said anything about heaven or hell.
This is a modern myth that is just as absurd
as claiming that Jesus never said anything
about demons or faith-healing...
...yet many people "believe" it...
...although they do not believe in Buddhism.
To be pithy about it: the notion of a secularized
Buddhism is especially influential for secular
people (perhaps much moreso than a secularized
Jesus, simply because Buddhism is exotic,
and brings with it a more complex philosophy).
These modern myths are much more influential
than anything the ancient texts say, partly
because they convince people to selectively
ignore the evidence of the ancient texts.
That is profound and serious problem for Buddhism
today (both as a religion and as an area of
study) and this problem has, frankly, encouraged
people to get into an ego-trip of imagining
that they're experts about things they're
ignorant of, simply by repeating generalizations
about the so-called historical Buddha.
The sense of confidence that secular people
feel in these ideas is, frankly, much more
shocking to me than religious conviction:
I've spoken to hundreds of people who feel
that they know "what the Buddha really taught",
without having read so much as a pamphlet,
and they're extremely dogmatic and close-minded
about it, without any participation in Buddhism
as a religion.
This is a quotation that I presented in my
essay "The Opposite of Buddhism", and the
man being quoted is one of the most influential
authors in the history of Buddhism.
The irony is that he is warning against the
tendency that became the dominant mode of
interpreting ancient Buddhist texts, and that
he and his wife engaged in this same tendency
a great deal: making up a standard of what
sort of things "the real Buddha" would say,
and then sifting through the mythology to
decide for oneself what is and what isn't
evidence of that historical Buddha.
He was himself guilty of this, and his wife
(who also became an influential author on
Buddhism) was even more guilty of it.
This was and remains the sort of unexamined
methodological assumption that our notions
of authenticity tend to rely upon.
I earlier mentioned the example of Shakespeare:
a skeptical reading of Hamlet cannot reveal
to us the historical reality of Hamlet.
On screen here, I'm suggesting Plato as another
example: we can't reveal "the real Plato"
by engaging in a skeptical reading of his
texts.
Further, what we think of as "skepticism"
here really means the imposition of modern
values: we're seeking out the affirmation
of modern values, with a very biased reading
of these texts, ignoring whatever contradicts
those values.
There are many things Plato says that now
seem to be, frankly, crazy; does that mean
that we should ignore whatever we now consider
crazy, to construct a more "rational" Plato?
No, not at all —although Plato, like the
Buddha, has been made into a sort of flag-carrier
for diverse political and psychological ideas
in the modern imagination.
The issues involved, however, are not just
the stuff of academic debates.
This pattern is especially disturbing to me
when it's applied to meditation cults, psychological
counselling and so on.
I made an earlier video on that subject, so
I say nothing more about it.
However, meditation cults do impact people,
personally, to a greater extent than a cult
based on singing and dancing; there's an ominous
area of research here, that almost nobody
is willing to talk about, in understanding
how people part ways with their money, and,
often, lose their own sense of independence
and identity, in getting involved with Buddhist
meditation.
Even supposedly-detached academics with PhDs
in Buddhism were, often enough, formerly cult
members, and you'll find that they rarely
want to discuss their personal history —least
of all their experience with meditation.
So, coming back to the main point to draw
just one positive conclusion (in these last
few slides):
This lens of apotheosis presumes a proto-religion
revolved around an all-too-human figure, prior
to the evidence that we have now from the
extant religion, with various supernatural
and theological aspects supposedly "added
on".
The problem is precisely this assumption of
what is "added on", and what we're now subtracting
in our analysis.
This attitude fosters the assumption that
the religion began with attitudes that were
more rational and more skeptical than later
periods (although, of course, there's no evidence
for this).
Later periods are therefore associated with
embellishment, exaggeration, superstition,
etc., in contrast to the first generation
of the religion's followers.
Why would this be true?
Why would the first generation of followers
be more skeptical (and less fanatical) than
later generations?
Well, the assumption is that people who met
these religious leaders face-to-face knew
that they were merely men and not gods, and
knew that they didn't have supernatural powers.
This seems plausible, but, really, it's untenable.
The first generation of a religion's followers
may be much more fanatical than later generations
—and we have many examples of new religions
being founded in recent centuries (in recent
decades!), with modern people easily convincing
themselves that living people have supernatural
powers, or that living people are themselves
god incarnate, and so on.
One of the crucial differences between mythology
and history is, simply, the intention of the
author.
It seems to be unfashionable to discuss this,
and people jump to the conclusion that you
want to discuss "intentions" in some kind
of psychologically detailed sense that can
never be known... but that's not really the
point here.
We can know what genre and what audience an
author was writing for.
Most of the time, we can clearly identify
the difference between a morality lecture
intended for adults, and a fable intended
for children.
The difference between Thucycides and Aesop
is not some kind of subtle, psychological
difference: it is the difference between two
genres, intended for very different audiences.
Establishing the intention of the author in
this fundamental sense really is possible,
if we're willing to admit to ourselves that
the vast majority of these religious texts
were not written with an interest in recording
history at all.
When you bring the question of Euhemerism
into the picture, stories about the Buddha
having dialogues with historical kings become
just as dubious as the stories about the Buddha
having dialogues with Indra, Brahma, demons
and so on.
In the same way that ancient Greeks wanted
to connect their gods to particular kings,
it is easy to imagine various motivations
for authors to connect the Buddha to royal
families, and it is not easy to evaluate any
of these myths as historical evidence.
If the intention of the author was not to
record history at all, we cannot look at the
fables as if they were historical records.
Although it is more plausible that a Buddhist
monk spoke to an historical king than to say
that he flew into heaven and spoke to Indra,
both are presented in the same genre, as very
much the same type of story.
It definitely is plausible that all of these
texts could be fables invented by authors
who had a very clear purpose: setting down
moral and philosophical doctrines for future
generations.
Today, the philosophy of the Buddha is much
easier to know than the history of early Buddhism,
because we only have the answers to questions
that the authors of those ancient texts wanted
to answer.
We have very precise evidence of what the
debates were that differentiated early Buddhist
philosophy from its Hindu rivals; meanwhile,
we still have open debate about what century
the Buddha lived and died in —about what
language he spoke, and so on.
The historical perspective is alien to religious
literature because, I think, it is essentially
nihilistic.
When Thucycides witnessed the great plague
of Athens, he noted down all the religious
rituals that people resorted to in trying
to save their own lives, and in begging the
gods to help their loved-ones.
He observed with brutal honesty that none
of those methods worked.
That's the historical attitude: terrible,
tragic events happen, and they're not made
to illustrate any kind of moral teaching,
they're not a parable or a fable, and, to
some extent, they don't even make sense.
They reflect the terrible, arbitrary quality
of real life, and Thucydides is enough of
a nihilist to be honest about it: people die
for no good reason, people turn to religion
to receive no help from it, and people ask
questions that have no good answers.
As a religion, Buddhism puts tremendous emphasis
on suffering, disease, death, and casts an
eye on the meaninglessness of war from time
to time, also.
You might think that, given these principles,
Buddhism would have produced many observations
of the brutality of history, comparable to
Thucydides.
On the contrary, however, the religion has
never produced even one author of this kind.
I think it's fair to say, instead, that Buddhism
has rather anti-historical attitudes, as a
consequence of its cosmology.
The role of Buddhism in witnessing great plagues
has never been to say, as Thucydides did,
that terrible things happened, that those
events matter in their own right (as facts
of history), and that all our cultural and
religious notions were powerless against those
facts.
Instead, Buddhism retreats into a cosmology
based on karma, reincarnation, and a magical
cycle of worlds that come and go, in which
the ideal matters much more than anything
that's real.
Even worse, Buddhism now leaves us with a
legacy of blaming the victim, insisting that
human suffering is the result of "bad karma"
from someone's own past actions.
These attitudes are, in short, anti-historical,
and have remained as such even as attempts
to modernize Buddhism became deeply involved
in politics, and legitimized their political
claims with assertions about "the Historical
Buddha" —or about whatever they supposed
the most authentic and definitive form of
Buddhism to be.
These were not problems answered by the earlier
generation of reformers and modernizers; they
remain questions for the new generation to
answer, if Buddhism is going to continue to
adapt at all.
For my part, I would prefer to stand with
the tiny minority of people who are willing
to be honest —as Thucydides was— about
what our history is, now, as it unfolds, and
I do not want to be part of a culture that
values fables more than facts.